Introduction
It’s Sunday and I meet her at the harbour. The sound of waves in the distance and seagulls above
my head when I meet her. She’s wearing a white shirt and slightly darker turtleneck, a pink tank
top beneath it. As usual, she’s also wearing her pink ribbon in her hair. We’ve known each other
for about a month and started dating last week. We decided to stop by at a café near the beach when
she asks whether I often date girls. I have to admit that she’s my first real date, after which she
teases me by calling me teacher. She giggles. At sunset, we take a stroll along the shores. She looks
like a model with the setting sun and sparkling sea behind her. Once we’re in front of her home, she
blushes and rhetorically asks whether it was a real date. Before I can answer, she waves at me and
runs towards her home. Upon entering my room, I receive a text message from her. ‘It’s already
bedtime for me, so good night. You better get to bed early, too, okay?’ I smile and wonder where this
is going.
This excerpt could have been from a diary, but it actually is a description of an event from
the dating simulation video game LovePlus, developed by Konami and released for Nintendo

DS in 2009. In this game, players fulfil the role of a second year transfer student, whose
personality is determined by blood type and self-reference.12 After finding a job at a family
restaurant, joining the library committee and train at the local tennis club, he becomes
engaged with three female characters, of which each one is associated with one of the
previously mentioned activities. In my case, I happen to get along best with the timid
classmate Manaka Takane, who excels in schoolwork and tennis, but has never been to a fast
food restaurant before.
The „gameplay‟ of LovePlus can generally be separated into two sections. I use single
apostrophes here to indicate that there is no actual „play‟ in the traditional sense of the word
to speak of. Advancing the story requires the player to tap the screen to select an option or
scroll through narratives and dialogues. During the first section of the game, he player has to
boost his personality (athletics, intelligence, sensitivity and charm) by engaging in various
activities, such as preparing for next day‟s lectures or attending at a committee meeting, to be
able to converse and eventually impress the female characters. The goal for this first section
is to have a girl confessing her love to the player, which has to be achieved through
conversation, walking home together, exchanging text messages and numerous dates, of
which one described above.
Once a girl confesses her love and the player indicates this feeling is mutual, a kiss
follows (again by tapping the touch screen) and the credits roll. The girl asks the player to
save the game before the start of the second section, where the aspect of dating simulation is
taking to a higher level. The game allows the player to choose between „real-time mode‟ (in
which the game‟s clock matches the Nintendo DS‟ clock, and thus advances in real time) and
„skip mode‟ (one day in the game equals a few minutes in real time, like in the first section of
the game). In „real-time mode‟, the player has the ability to call his girlfriend during classes to
meet her afterwards to talk, often literally via the Nintendo DS‟ internal microphone, and
schedule a date, at which the player has to attend in real-time. The goal of this second part
and ultimate achievement of LovePlus for the player is to maintain a healthy relationship and
eventually marry his favourite girl.

The protagonist in LovePlus is male and the game itself targets a male audience, therefore I will refer to „the
player‟ as male.
2 At the beginning of the game, the player can choose whether he would like the protagonist to refer to himself
as ore or boku, both generally used by males to refer to themselves, albeit ore is considered slightly more boastful.
1

What is remarkable about LovePlus in comparison with other dating simulation video
games (hereafter: dating sims), is that although it follows the conventions of visual novels
during the first section, similar to any typical dating sim, it innovates within the boundaries
of dating sims by emphasizing what is called „techno-intimacy‟ during the second section of
the game. As this statement may require some contextualization, I will shortly discuss the
history of, and subgenres associated with dating sims before focusing on the definition of
„techno-intimacy‟ in relation to LovePlus and other video games and toys. During the
conclusion, it is my attempt to answer the following research question:
Can we consider Japanese dating simulation video games as serious games?

Historizing ‘techno-intimacy’
Dating sims originated as a hybrid of the genres simulation games and visual novels,
interactive fiction with static images that require little effort from the player. Dating sims
have been in circulation since early 1980‟s (Jones, 2005) and nearly all follow the conventions
of previously released dating sims. The player takes controls of a male protagonist, often a
high school student surrounded by female friends, who attempts to evoke affection from the
girls around him through correct choices during conversations. The goal of such dating sim
is to eventually engage in a relationship or have sexual intercourse with one of female
characters before the game ends, often after a predetermined period of time. Dating sims
feature multiple female characters with each their own story and branching dialogues, to
provide the game with more replay value.
While dating sims most often involve a male protagonist surrounded by female
characters, also called bishōjo gēmu („beautiful girl games‟), there are numerous variations
among the dating sims. One of the more popular subgenres is otome gēmu („maiden games‟),
which feature a female protagonist with male friends to engage with. Other subgenres
revolve around homosexual relationships, such as BL (Boys‟ Love) and GL (Girls‟ Love)
games, also known as yaoi3 and yuri4 games, respectively. Another major subgenre is the erogē
(„erotic game‟), which is more focused on sexual relationships and therefore features
pornographic content. Even within this subgenre, there are various niche subgenres
satisfying on a player‟s more deviant desires, such as shota, 5 the focus on young male
characters, and erogē that revolve around kemono („anthropomorphic animals‟) or female
hybrids of human and mythological monsters.
The majority of dating sims end when the player manages to successfully establish a
relationship with one of the female characters in the game. In LovePlus, however, achieving

The term yaoi is an acronym for yama naishi, ochi naishi, imi naishi („no climax, no conclusion, no meaning‟) and
is often compared to American slash-fiction. (Thorn, 2004)
4 The origin of the term yuri remains unclear. According to the website of Yuricon, “[i]n 1973, Itou Bungaku,
the editor of Barazoku, a gay men‟s magazine, called lesbians in Japan “the lily tribe” - bara is Japanese for
“rose” and yuri is Japanese for the lily. Hence, gay men were barazoku (薔薇族), or “rose tribe” while lesbians
were yurizoku (百合族), the lily tribe. This name was taken by many hentai manga and doujinshi artists, who then
named their lesbian characters “Yuri” or “Yuriko,” so that it became a kind of cliche‟ for the genre itself.”
(Friedman, 2011. Her italics).
5 “Shota is an abbreviation for “Shōtarō complex,” from Kaneda Shotarō, the boy who pilots the robot in the
manga and anime Tetsujin 28 gō (what became Gigantor in English
3

this is merely the first section of the game, which indeed unfolds as if it were a conventional
bishōjo gēmu. In the second section of LovePlus, the game continues to build not only on the
relationship between the protagonist and female character, but also the relationship between
the player and his virtual girlfriend. Such relationship between man and machine is what
Anne Allison calls „techno-intimacy‟ in her chapter on Tamagotchi, a portable gaming device
that allowed players to raise a virtual and fictional pet. (2006) Allison discovers a clear shift
in Japan‟s ideologies and argues that:
“Techno-intimacy is a sign of the times. While mecha-tronics was the fantasy as well as national policy
for rebuilding Japan after the war – remaking the country as a techno supernation – sof-tronics is the
symptom and corrective to this industrial master plan in the new millennium – assuaging the atomism,
alienation, and stress of corporatist capitalism with virtual companionship.” (Allison, 2006: 190)

In order words, there has been a shift in the ideology of mecha around the turn of the
millennium. After the devastating impact of the Second World War on Japan, ideologies of
the nation‟s rebuild were initiated by manga and later anime revolving around mecha, such as
the early works of Osamu Tezuka‟s Astro Boy (1952). This perception was further fuelled by
popular television series, for example Space Battleship Yamato (Matsumoto, 1974) and the start
of the Gundam series with Mobile Suit Gundam (Tomino, 1979). This „mecha-tronicism‟ arguably
climaxed with the controversial anime series Neon Genesis Evangelion (Anno, 1995),6 which can
be perceived as a metaphorical rendition of post-war Japan with an initial emphasis on mecha
during the first twenty episodes, followed by a sudden shift towards psychological affection
and criticism regarding mecha in latter episodes.
In 1996, the year Neon Genesis Evangelion‟s broadcast ended, Japan‟s ideology shifted
from mecha-tronics to sof-tronics. Japanese toy and video game maker Bandai started selling
Tamagotchi devices. Although it sold forty million units worldwide by spring 1998 and the
Tamagotchi craze died off, the “mechanical fantasy it gave form to – techno-intimacy – has
Neon Genesis Evangelion had a tough development cycle. After the Sarin gas attack in Tokyo‟s subway in
1995, director Hideki Anno had to remove elements that he felt were too similar to the accident and thus alter
the plot, resulting in scheduling restraints and a decrease in the amount of frames that could be drawn for each
episode since episode 16. (Woznicki, 1998) The two latter episodes primarily consisted of static images and
narration by the voice actors, which fans received as disappointing. After the series‟ broadcast, Anno produced
a film named Death and Rebirth, which was primarily a recap of broadcasted episodes and the first half of the
definitive ending, which could not be finished due to budget issues. In 1997, after having Anno having received
numerous death threats, he released the second half of the definitive ending as the award winning film The End
of Evangelion, and included some of the death threats in the ending of the movie.
6

only intensified in the years afterward (…)”. (Allison, 2006: 188) Allison fortifies her
argument by listing subsequently releases of „sof-tronics‟, such as the Furby, an electronic toy
resembling an rodent-esque owl by Hasbro‟s Tiger Electronics, and AIBO, Sony‟s
autonomous robotic pet dog. As these examples demonstrate, the concept of „technointimacy‟ was initially focused on the relationship between human and virtual pets based on
hardware.
Ten years prior to the release of the Tamagotchi, however, similar relationships
between human and non-human were utilized in video games, an early example being Digital
Devil Story: Megami Tensei (Atlus, 1987), in which the protagonist could summon tamed
demons from another dimension into the real world. This concept was later reused by
Dragon Quest V (Chunsoft, 1992) and ever since popularized by Nintendo with the Pokémon
metaseries, in which the player has to catch, train and then use monsters in combat. Nine
years later Nintendo again demonstrated the success of raising virtual pets in the awardwinning Nintendo DS game Nintendogs (Nintendo EAD, 2005), making use of the touch
screen to caress the dog and speak through the microphone to learn the dog its name.
While raising a virtual pet in the numerous above mentioned games and maintaining
a healthy relationship with a virtual girlfriend such as in LovePlus may seem quite
contradictory at first, both approaches to simulation games heavily depend on the
relationship between man and machine, or „techno-intimacy‟. In the case of the Pokémon
franchise, the player can select one out of three Pokémon monsters to start his adventure
with. Since the first generation of Pokémon games, Pokémon Red and Green (Game Freak,
1996)7, each generation has introduced at least 150 new Pokémon monsters, accumulating in
646 collectable creatures in the series‟ latest entries, Pokémon White Version and Black Version
(2010). Based on empirical observations, it seems that albeit one playthrough often exceeds
25 hours, many players will keep their initial Pokémon in their active party throughout the
game. One member of the online forums of The Escapist states that he “love[s] [his] starter
pokémon with all [his] heart”, while another member proclaims to feel “guilty” if he does
leave his initial Pokémon out of his active party. (The Escapist, 2010) These comments
illustrate that man‟s „techno-intimacy‟ is not limited to artificial intelligent toys, such as the
Tamagotchi and Furby, but also may portray affection towards fictional creatures within a
video game.
7

In Western regions, the first generation Pokémon games were released as Pokémon Red and Pokémon Blue.

Ever since Japan‟s ideologies have shifted from mecha-tronics to sof-tronics, scholars
have attempted to explain the relation between man and machine. According to Allison, “(...)
the tamagotchi serves to artificially “imagine” for its users; it operates as a fetish bearing both
an absence (a loss) and a presence (that masks, stands in place for, and – in this case – also
transforms what has been lost and is still desired). (2006: 190, her italics) Similarly,
anthropologist Masao Yamaguchi has argued that mechanical puppets, or robots, of which
the first were created as early as the seventeenth century in Japan, have been considered as
an extension of the human figure. (2002) Furthermore, he argues that: “(...) Japan
industrialized through the spirit of play, and not through calculated economic logic as is
usually assumed both by the Japanese themselves as well as by foreign observers.”
(Yamauchi, 2002: 82).
Even today, this historical approach towards „techno-intimacy‟ may explain the
affinity between the Japanese and machines. As Allison indicates, “[i]ntimate play goods are
machines used for play and instruction and also for communication and companionship.
Significantly, these devices are also said to be “healing” in rhetoric that assumed players are
already wounded: psychically on edge, overworked, stressed out. Being touched by another,
albeit a machine, is soothing: the s(t)imulation of social intercourse.” (2006, 190)
As discussed before, Konami explored the possibilities of „techno-intimacy‟ between
the player and a virtual girlfriend in LovePlus. Before Konami developed LovePlus, however, it
already had a rich history of developing dating sims, most notably the popular Tokimeki
Memorial (1994) series. This franchise consists of six main games, numerous spin-offs titles,
an anime television series and a live-action movie. Despite the immense popularity of
Tokimeki Memorial in Japan, it received little attention from Western audiences, partly because
none of the games had been professionally translated and localized in Western regions.8 In
December 2009, LovePlus received global attention as one of the players, a man who uses the
moniker SAL9000, married his virtual girlfriend in LovePlus (Meyers, 2009). One may argue
that this extraordinary marriage might have been a PR stunt by publisher Konami rather an
actual declaration of love, but one cannot question the existence of the otaku subculture in
Japan, which I will further elaborate before moving on to the discussion of the seriousness
of „techno-intimacy‟ and dating sims in the remaining section of this paper.
Various communities devoted to hacking games, such as GBAtemp, offer a platform for members to voluntarily engage in projects focused on translating games that are not professionally translated and localized by
Western publishers.
8

Theorizing the otaku and his sexual desires
In an interview with Reuters Television, SAL9000 commented that in “the Japanese otaku or
nerd culture, there's a tradition of calling characters my wife, and I sort of thought of [the
virtual female character] Nene as my wife. Since I was calling her that, I thought we'd just
have to get married then.” (Meyers, 2009) While Reuters translated otaku as „nerd‟, it is
problematic to compare, let alone equate the Japanese term otaku to the Western notion of a
nerd or geek. Indeed, although there might be some similarities between the terms, such as
association with negative connotations and an interest in video games, the term otaku is
much more complex than this, as I will further elaborate in the following paragraphs.
In general, the Japanese term otaku is used to indicate people, often male adults, with
an – literally – obsessive interest in anime, manga and video games. The term was first
coined during the 1980‟s and has been associated with negative connotations throughout the
1990‟s. 9 An important work in defining the principles and intentions of the otaku, is the
manifesto Denpa Otoko (literally „Nonsense Man‟, 2005) by Tohru Honda. In this book,
Honda, who considers himself as an otaku, criticizes the novel Densha Otoko („Train Man‟,
2004) by Nakano Hitori, in which an otaku saves a female passenger on a train from sexual
harassment by a drunk person and upon sharing his story on the online Japanese textboard
2channel, he is considered an hero and entitled Densha Otoko. In the end, the otaku and the
passenger he saved fall in love and eventually leaves 2channel after inappropriate messages
from other posters. Honda argues in Denpa Otoko that if Densha Otoko would have been a
„real otaku‟, he would not have given up his hobbies for “love capitalism”; instead, he would
have introduced her to 2channel and transformed her into an otaku (Honda, 2005).
Although the otaku subculture and associated cultural products, such as anime and
manga, have long been associated with negative connotations, there have recent been various
attempts to „cleanse‟ the term otaku. Former Minister for Foreign Affairs Tarō Asō is
considered an otaku for reading a dozen of manga on a weekly basis and introducing the
This negative sentiment was initially caused by accidents throughout the 1980‟s and 90‟s, as described by
professor Susan J. Napier in the foreword of her book on research in the field of anime and manga: “On a
more ominous note, Japanese society has on occasion convulsed into what the sociologist Sharon Kinsella has
described as a “moral panic” regarding the otaku culture, as it determined anime and manga to be socially
unhealthy. The first time this occurred was in the 1980s when a young man accused of murdering four little
girls was found to be an avid watcher of violent pornographic anime. More recently, the Japanese media,
indulging in an orgy of blame-finding for the disastrous sarin gas subway attack in 1995 by the cult group Aum
Shinrikyo, claimed that many of Aum's “best and brightest” followers were also avid fans of apocalyptic science
fiction anime.” (Napier, 2005: 8)
9

National Manga Award for non-Japanese manga artists in order to cultivate ties with foreign
countries in 2007. (International Manga Award, 2010)
Since the turn of the millennium, the otaku culture has also been a regular field for
academic research. In his work on the animalization of the otaku culture, cultural critic
Azuma Hiroki described the shift in the postmodern otaku culture from prioritizing the
quality of individual works to the attractiveness of characters in anime and manga. In order
for producers to evoke moe (the fictional desire for characters of anime, manga, games and
pop idols), they draw elements of moe from databases, such as the elements of “cat ear” and
“hair sticking up like antennae”. (Azuma, 2009: 47) Another significant work in this field is
practicing therapist Saitō Tamaki‟s psychoanalytic approach of otaku‟s desires in Sentō bishōjo
no seishin bunseki („Armored cuties: A psychoanalysis‟, 2001). Tamaki indicated that definitions
of the otaku are often exposed to impressions and value judgments and it was his attempt to
describe the otaku with as few distortions as possible. His descriptors of the otaku are as
follows: “They have an affinity for fictional contexts (kyokō no kontekusuto); They resort to
fictionalization in order to possess the objects of their love; They have multiple orientations
when it comes to enjoying fiction; For them fiction itself can be a sexual object.” (Tamaki,
2007)
The otaku‟s consumption of moe databases as described by Azuma and Tamaki‟s
descriptor of the otaku‟s affinity for fictional contexts are key concepts in understanding the
„techno-intimacy‟ in LovePlus. In order to illustrate these concepts within the context of
LovePlus, I would once again like to focus on Manaka Takane, one of the three female
characters in the game. Like Azuma‟s example of Neon Genesis Evangelion character Rei,
“using newly registered moe-elements (quiet personality, blue hair, white skin, mysterious
power)” (Azuma, 2009: 52), LovePlus character Manake Takane‟s characteristics can also be
broken into moe-elements, such as quiet personality, shy, long hair, ribbon and outfit (during
her tennis matches). While Nene Anegasaki, the female character SAL9000 married, may
also be associated with the moe-elements shy and outfit (during her part-time job), she differs
from Manake Takane in that her mature personality is associated with the moe-element of
oneesan („big sister‟).
While these characters may have been originally constructed by accumulating moeelements, there are many imageboards which allow users to insert moe-elements in a search
engine to discover illustrations that correspond with the moe-elements the user inserted. For

example, if one searches for the moe-elements „ribbon‟ and „outfit‟, it is likely that illustrations
of LovePlus character Manaka Takane in her tennis outfit appear, along with other
illustrations that have been tagged with these moe-elements. The user can further specify the
search by adding more specific terms, such as „LovePlus‟ or the name of a character. These
non-hierarchical semantic structured imageboards, such as Danbooru, are clear and common
examples, or actually translations of Azuma‟s concept of “database consumption”. (2009: 47)
Tamaki‟s descriptor of the otaku‟s affinity for fictional context, more specifically the
resort to fictionalization in order to possess the objects of their love, is also clearly
demonstrated by fanatic LovePlus players. In the year of LovePlus‟ release, the Japanese
website Hachimaki shared messages from otaku‟s who excessively celebrated the birthday of
LovePlus character Manaka Takane (Hachimaki, 2009). Manners of celebrations range from
baking a birthday cake that features the character‟s name to the purchase of perfume and
flowers for the otaku‟s virtual girlfriend. One year later, Sankaku Complex reported about an
otaku who collected numerous Nintendo DS units and LovePlus games, and arranged the
consoles in a circle around a birthday cake to simulate a birthday for his virtual girlfriend
(„Artefact‟, 2010). The numerous photographs this very otaku shot and shared through online
textboards illustrate the otaku‟s resort to fictionalization, as the room in which the birthday
was held featured merchandise, such as figurines and posters, all based on or inspired by the
LovePlus character Manaka Takane.

Defining, or an attempt to define serious games
So far, I have introduced and described the content of dating sim LovePlus, contextualized
the concept of „techno-intimacy‟ within the medium of video of games and theorized the
audience at which these dating sims are aimed. In the final section of this paper, I would like
to explore the boundaries, or rather a lack of clearly defined boundaries of „serious games‟ in
order to argue that dating sims, such as LovePlus, may as well be considered as serious games.
In order to do so, I will cite definitions of serious games by other scholars and discuss in
detail to what extent these dating sims can be perceived as a serious games based on each
definition.
In the introduction to her book Critical Play: Radical Game Design (2009), author
Mary Flanagan provides the following description of what she calls „activist games‟:
"They [activist games] are not purely conceptual exercises, but rather, games that engage in a social
issue through, most commonly, themes, narratives, roles, settings, goals, and characters; and less
commonly, through game mechanics, play paradigms, interactions, or win states to benefit an intended
outcome beyond a game's entertainment or experiential value alone.” (Flanagan, 2009: 13)

While Flanagan does not explicitly use the ambiguous term serious games, her descriptive
outline of so-called „activist games‟ corresponds with the majority of features that other
scholars associate with serious games. Of importance is Flanagan‟s argument that these
activist games „engage in a social issue‟, which is no less ambiguous than the term serious
games itself. These social issues can be interpreted both as issues that play a significant role
within a society and as issues in terms of social relationships and relevant interpersonal
complications. While a typical dating sim is rarely concerned with political and governmental
activities, it does provide the player with characters, often female, that embody a common
social issue. For example, in the case of Clannad (Key, 2004), a popular visual novel
bordering on the genre of dating sims, social issues embodied by female characters range
from an ingenious orphan who suffers from introversion since her parents‟ deaths to a
fragile girl who, despite her efforts, repeatedly succumbs to illness and fails her third school
year two years in a row.
Important elements in the engagement of social issues, according to Flanagan, are
“most commonly, themes, narratives, roles, settings, goals, and characters (...)” (2009: 13). In

demonstrating the equal importance of these elements in dating sims, I will ground my
argument on Clannad‟s overarching and recurring theme: „family‟. In a fight with his alcoholic
father, male protagonist Tomoya permanently injured his shoulder, preventing him from
playing basketball. After numerous attempts to decline his father‟s alcohol use, Tomoya
leaves his father behind and moves in at his best female friend‟s home, whose family he
perceives as „perfect‟. (Enterbrain, 2004) This basic summary of the protagonist‟s story arc
already indicates the importance of the theme „family‟ and its link with the narratives, setting,
goals and characters.
Moreover, similar to Flanagan‟s „activist games‟, in dating sims there is little emphasis
on “game mechanic, play paradigms, interactions, or win states to benefit an intended
outcome beyond a game's entertainment or experiential value alone” (Flanagan, 2009: 13).
Game mechanics, play paradigms and interaction are usually limited to pressing a button (in
the cases of Clannad and Tokimeki Memorial) or touching the screen (in LovePlus) to advance
the narrative. Branching dialogues require the player to occasionally select one out of three
or four options to determine through what branch the dialogue will continue. In LovePlus,
the player also has the ability to „touch‟ and „talk‟ to the female characters by using the
Nintendo DS‟s touch screen and internal microphone, respectively.
To provide another definition of serious games, the essay „The Playful and the
Serious: An approximation to Huizinga's Homo Ludens‟ by Hector Rodriguez advances the
following core argument:
“Playing can be part of the learning process because the subject to be learnt is, at least in some
respects, essentially playful. The use of serious games in the learning process therefore illuminates the
fundamental nature of the subject being taught.” (Rodriguez, 2006)

Rodriguez‟ notion of serious games initially evokes a sense of traditional education through a
virtual medium, such as learning the subjects of mathematics or biology. I would like to
argue that education in serious games is not limited to subjects of disciplines or traditional
school courses, but can also extend to the subject of social interaction, as demonstrated by
LovePlus. While one may argue that the primary goal of LovePlus is entertaining the player and
satisfying the desires of the otaku, one cannot deny the sense of „realism‟ that the virtual
girlfriends in LovePlus evoke.

As the term „realism‟ is used in many contexts and defined in numerous manners, I
would like to discuss my use of this term before advancing my argument. In Lev Manovich‟s
article on technology and style in cinema, the author explores various types of cinematic
realism. (1992) In citing French film critic and film theorist André Bazin, Manovich
identifies the function of Bazin‟s realism as “the reconstruction of a perfect illusion of the
outside world in sound, color and relief”, (quoted in Manovich) contrasting it with French
film director Jean-Louis Comolli‟s more ideological interpretation of realism. As Konami has
attempted to „reconstruct‟ the female as a virtual female character in LovePlus, the definition
of realism in my argument parallels Bazin‟s statement that “the modern technology of
cinema is a realization of an ancient myth of mimesis”. (Manovich, 1992) The reconstruction
of reality in LovePlus is naturally not limited to merely the appearance of the female
characters, but also the manner in which they speak, address the player, behaviour and
change in personality over a longer period. Therefore, one may consider the „reconstructed‟
female characters in LovePlus‟ reality as a „constructed reflection‟ of moe-elements drawn from
a database to attract players, (Azuma, 2009) constituted into a reflection of actual female
humans to evoke a sense of realism.
If we perceive the female characters in LovePlus‟ from this perspective, one may
consider the moe of these characters as an invitation for otaku‟s to engage into learning and
experimenting with human interaction in a „reconstructed‟ and therefore secure reality. An
example of this learning process was illustrated in the August 14th, 2010 issue of the
Japanese newspaper Asahi Shinbun. The article cited a fanatic LovePlus player, in real life a 21
year-old single sarariiman,10 who considered his virtual girlfriend a “practice for when he finds
a real girlfriend” (quoted in JIN, 2010). Thus, while theoretically the subject of LovePlus,
interacting with one‟s girlfriend, can be learned through playing the game, there are also
examples of players, more specifically otaku‟s, who consider the game as a manner of practice
for future engagements with women.
The third and final definition I will base my argument on, is taken from the book
„Serious Games: Mechanisms and Effects‟ by Ute Ritterfeld, Michael J. Cody, Peter Vorderer.
In the introduction to their book, they define serious games as follows:

10

Sarariiman is a common term used to indicate office workers (literally, „salary man‟).

“As starting point, we define serious games as any form of interactive computer-based game software
for one or multiple players to be used on any platform and that has been developed with the intention
to be more than entertainment.” (Ritterfeld et al., 2009:

6)

What is problematic about this rather broad definition in this particular research is the latter
remark concerning “developed with the intention to be more than entertainment”.
Developers of the more popular and thus influential dating sims, such as LovePlus, prefer to
remain anonymous, no interviews or other forms of information regarding the developers‟
motives and intentions for designing these games can be found. While LovePlus has been
clearly designed to entertain the player, it is difficult to estimate whether the game was
developed with the intention to be educational or even persuasive. Although some players
consider the game as practice for future engagement with women, as I just indicated, it
remains unclear whether this „serious approach‟ was an intentional part of the development.
Needless to say, further research is required and essential to clarify the developers‟ intentions
concerning LovePlus‟ development.

Conclusion
In the concluding section of present paper, it is my attempt to answer the research question
as stated at the beginning of this paper:
Can we consider Japanese dating simulation video games as serious games?
By illustrating the effects of „techno-intimacy‟ and citing generally accepted definitions of
serious games to use these definitions as a theoretical framework for dating sims, I have
demonstrated that Japanese dating sims can indeed be considered as serious games. By
following Flanagan‟s definition, I have demonstrated that there is little difference in game
design between what she describes as „activist games‟ and dating sims such as LovePlus.
Furthermore, Rodriguez‟ definition of serious games emphasized the educational aspect of
serious games. Although it remains unclear whether LovePlus was intentionally designed to
serve the purpose of practicing future engagements with women, as I elaborated with
Ritterfeld‟s definition, LovePlus can indeed be perceived in this fashion, as illustrated by
otaku‟s undertakings throughout this paper.
Unintentionally, I have also demonstrated the lack of clearly defined boundaries of
definitions of serious games. For example, none of the aforementioned definitions state that
virtually every serious game is available for use, often as download, at no cost or an optional
fee, while LovePlus has to be purchased in stores for a price equal to that of other video
games. Another characteristic of serious games that scholars rarely define is the scope of the
issues addressed by these games. Mostly, serious games present social issues on a global level,
such as the “logistical challenges of delivering food aid in a major humanitarian crisis” in the
case of Food Force (World Food Programme, 2005) and “Civilisation is headed for meltdown.
Can you prevent it?” in Fate of the World (Red Redemption, 2011). Individuals‟ social issues,
such as problems concerning making friends or engaging in conversations with possible
partners, may be considered as unique among topics in serious games.

Works cited
 Allison, Anne (2006). “Tamagotchi. The Prosthetics of Presence”, Millennial monsters:
Japanese toys and the global imagination, University of California Press, pp. 163-191.


Anno, Hideki (1995). Neon Genesis Evangelion (新世紀エヴァンゲリオン, „Shin Seiki
Evangerion‟) [Anime TV series]. Gainax.



Artefact (2010). “Creepy Otaku Celebrate Manaka‟s Birthday”, Sankaku Complex,
URL: http://www.sankakucomplex.com/2010/10/06/creepy-otaku-celebratemanakas-birthday/, accessed 2 November 2011.



Atlus (1987). Digital Devil Story: Megami Tensei (デジタル・デビル物語 女神転
生,



„Dejitaru Debiru Sutōrī Megami Tensei‟) [Family Computer game]. Tokyo: Namco.

Azuma, Hiroki (2009). Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals, trans. Abel, Jonathan E.,
Kono, Shion. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.



Chunsoft (1992). Dragon Quest V: Hand of the Heavenly Bride (ドラゴンクエスト V 天空
の花嫁, „Doragon

Kuesuto Faibu Tenkū no Hanayome‟) [Super Family Computer game].

Tokyo: Enix Corporation.


Enterbrain (2004). Clannad Visual Fan Book. Tokyo: Enterbrain.



Friedman, Erica (2011). “What is Yuricon?/What is Yuri?”, Yuricon, URL:
http://www.yuricon.com/what-is-yuricon/, accessed 6 November 2011.



Game Freak (1996). Pokémon Red & Green (ポケットモンスター 赤・緑, „Poketto
Monsutā Aka/Midori‟) [Game Boy game]. Nintendo.



Game Freak (2010). Pokémon Black Version & White Version (ポケットモンスターブラ
ック・ホワイト,

„Poketto Monsutā Burakku Howaito‟) [Nintendo DS game]. Kyoto:

Nintendo.


Hachimaki (2009). “「ラブプラス」のヒロイン高嶺 愛花の誕生会がささやかに行われ
ました

(„Love Plus‟ heroin Takane Makana‟s small birthday party‟)”, Hackimaki, URL:

http://blog.livedoor.jp/htmk73/archives/318078.html, accessed 2 November 2011.


Hitori, Nakano (2004). Densha Otoko (電車男, „Train Man‟). Tokyo: Shinchōsha.



Honda, Tohru (2005). Denpa Otoko (電波男, „Nonsense Man‟). Tokyo: Sansai Books.



International Manga Award (2010). “About the MANGA Award”, International Manga
Award, URL: http://www.manga-award.jp/en/whats.html, accessed 28 October
2011.



JIN (2010). “『ラブプラス+』「彼女ができた時の練習になるかも」(„”Love Plus+”
„Maybe a good practice for when I have a girlfriend‟), My Game News Flash @ JIN,
URL: http://jin115.com/archives/51700035.html, accessed 3 November 2011.



Jones, Matthew T. (2005). “The Impact of Telepresence on Cultural Transmission
through Bishoujo Games”, PsychNology Journal, Issue 3, Volume 3, pp. 292–311.



Key (2004). Clannad (クラナド, „Kuranado‟) [PC game]. Osaka: Visual Art‟s.



Konami (1994). Tokimeki Memorial (ときめきメモリアル, „Tokimeki Memoriaru‟) [PC
Engine game]. Tokyo: Konami.



Konami (2009). LovePlus (ラブプラス, Rabu Purasu) [Nintendo DS game]. Tokyo:
Konami.



Manovich, Lev (1992). “Lev Manovich, “Assembling Reality: Myths of Computer
Graphics”, Afterimage, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 12-14.



Matsumoto, Reiji (1974). Space Battleship Yamato (宇宙戦艦ヤマト, ‘Uchū Senkan
Yamato‟) [Anime TV series]. Academy Productions.



Meyers, Chris (2009). “Japanese man takes video game character as wife”, Reuters,
URL: http://www.reuters.com/article/2009/12/20/us-japan-videogameidUSTRE5BJ1XX20091220, accessed 28 October 2011.



Napier, Susan J. (2005). Anime from Akira to Howl's Moving Castle, Updated Edition:
Experiencing Contemporary Japanese Animation. Palgrave Macmillan.



Nintendo EAD [Entertainment Analysis and Development] (2005). Nintendogs (ニン
テンドッグス,



„Nintendoggusu‟) [Nintendo DS game]. Kyoto: Nintendo.

Red Dedemption (2011). Fate of the World [PC game]. URL:
http://fateoftheworld.net/, accessed 6 November 2011.



Ritterfeld, Ude, Cody, Michael, and Vorderer, Peter (2009). “Chapter 1:
Introduction”, Serious Games: Mechanisms and Effects, New York: Routledge, pp. 3-9.



Rodriguez, Hector (2006). “The Play and the Serious: An approximation of
Huizinga‟s Homo Ludens”, Game Studies, Vol. 6, Issue 1, URL:
http://www.gamestudies.org/0601/articles/rodriges, accessed 7 October 2011.



Tamaki, Saitō (2007). “Otaku Sexuality”, in Robot Ghosts and Wired Dreams,
Christopher Bolton, Istvan Csicsery-Ronay Jr., and Takayuki Tatsumi ed.: University
of Minnesota Press, pp. 222-249.



Tezuka, Osamu (1952). Astro Boy (鉄腕アトム, „Tetsuwan Atomu‟) [Manga]. Kodansha.



Thorn, Matthew (2004). “Girls And Women Getting Out Of Hand: The Pleasure
And Politics Of Japan's Amateur Comics Community”, Fanning the Flames: Fans and
Consumer Culture in Contemporary Japan, William W. Kelly, ed.: New York: State
University of New York Press.



Tomino, Yoshiyuki (1979). Mobile Suit Gundam (機動戦士ガンダム, „Kidō Senshi
Gandamu‟) [Anime TV series]. Sunrise.



World Food Programme (2005). Food Force [PC Game]. URL:
http://www.wfp.org/how-to-help/individuals/food-force



Woznicki, Krystian (1998). “Towards a cartography of Japanese anime”, Nettime,
URL: http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9802/msg00101.html,
accessed 28 October 2011.



Yamaguchi, Masao (2002). “Karakuri: the ludic relationship between man and
machine in Tokugawa Japan”, Japan at Play, Henry, Joy, and Raveri, Massimo, ed.,
London: Routledge, pp. 72-83.


